Battery Control
===============

Overview
--------

Batteries offer a great way to power mobile robotic devices. Many are
easily rechargeable and can provide large amounts of current for motors
and other high current devices.

Danger
------

We will mostly be using Lithium Polymer (LiPo) batteries. The advantage
of these sorts of batteries are that they can provide a large amount of
power for their size and weight. They can be recharged quickly and can
last much longer than other types of storage batteries. The disadvantage
is that if they are not managed carefully they can catch fire or even
explode.

The following are three important states to be aware of when using LiPo
batteries.

Balance Charge
--------------

A LiPo battery should be charged to balance charge before being used in
your device. The balance charge ensures that each cell in the battery
pack is charged to the identical voltage level.

Low Voltage
-----------

It is important to make sure that the voltage in a battery never reaches
below the danger threshold level. In order to ensure this does not
happen, batteries should be checked every day using a LiPo tester.

Storage Charge
--------------

Before returning a battery to storage it should be correctly discharged
to a storage state selecting the Storage Charge state on the battery
charger.

Connectors
----------

It is very important to only use polarized connectors with the LiPo
batteries. These batteries are very powerful and can easily cause a fire
and destroy your circuit in the following situations.

Short Circuit
-------------

If the two leads of the battery are allowed to touch each other, this
causes a short circuit. At the very least this will cause a dangerous
spark. It will also most likely damage the battery and cause a fire.

Reverse Polarity
----------------

If you mistaken reverse the leads on the battery and apply the positive
lead of the battery to the ground on your circuit and the negative lead
to power, you circuit and board will most likely be destroyed.

For more information on `battery
power. <https://www.google.com/url?q=https://docs.google.com/document/d/1BmZbXzxnD2j17QToSZ9jeZmnP7burwfksfQq2v4zu-Y/edit%23heading%3Dh.po3whfrs5bxa&sa=D&ust=1587613174157000>`__Â 

Challenge
~~~~~~~~~

Drive your motor control circuit using a single 7.2V (2 cell) LiPo
battery. This challenge requires you to construct a connector from your
battery to the breadboard, convert the 7.2V battery power to 5V for the
logic circuits and pass the 7.2V to drive the motor. Make sure to check
with your teacher before moving on to the next step. Lipo batteries are
dangerous!

Create a battery connector with a polarized JST connector on one end
mating with the JST connector on the battery and a two wire header on
the other end that can plug into your breadboard.

TEACHER CHECK \_\_\_\_

Set up your breadboard (if you have not already done so) with 5 volt
regulator to drive both the logic circuit and the motor controller.

TEACHER CHECK \_\_\_\_

Connect your lipo cable to your breadboard circuit.

TEACHER CHECK \_\_\_\_
